---
layout: post
title: "W-JAX 2015 Part 1: Agile Day"
date: "2015-11-30 12:00:00"
icon: comments
categories: conferences
authors: ["Silvio"]
---

From November 2nd to November 6th the W-JAX 2015 took place in Munich. Although this annual conference has a major focus on Java (EE), it also covers software development & architecture in general, enterprise technologies, Big Data, microservices, DevOps and many more interesting topics.

In a series of articles we would like to highlight some aspects of this year's W-JAX. The first post covers outcomes of the conference's Agile Day. The different sessions were dedicated to agile development as well as team- & company organization.

# What is agile?

The main ideas of agile development are summarised in the [Agile Manifesto](http://www.agilemanifesto.org/). First published in February 2001, it defines the following four values:

* **Individuals and interactions** over processes and tools
* **Working software** over comprehensive documentation
* **Customer collaboration** over contract negotiation
* **Responding to change** over following a plan

In contrast to the waterfall model, agile software development is an iterative process: The target system is not planned ahead in full detail, but planning and development go hand in hand in iterative cycles. The key to success is early feedback: After each iteration the result should be presented to the management or the stakeholder, giving them the opportunity to approve the software or point to necessary changes. You should also aim to have a prototype ("walking skeleton") as early as possible to verify it against the stakeholder's business goals. Having this, you can react to errors early.

Another key aspect is having self-organising, cross-functional teams. This does not only include having various experts (e.g. web design, JavaScript, backend, ...) in one team. But other departments, such as product management, marketing, or sales, should work together with the developers daily in order to make the project successful.

# Agile growth

When an organization wants to go the agile way or wants to expand its agile concept, two important questions should be asked:

* On which (agile) level is the organization?
* What do we want to change / achieve?

The Agile Fluency Model can give an answer to the first question. Released by Diana Larsen and James Shore, it illustrates different levels of agile development and the time that is necessary to get to the next level. For more information on this model, please read [Anja's blog post](https://developer.epages.com/blog/2015/09/24/agile-fluency.html).

Having the second question in mind is important to define goals for the agile improvement. Possible answers could be:

* We want to have more agile development teams or improve their methods.
* We want to have an agile product development from the first idea until deployment.
* We want to develop a distributed product- or company strategy.
* We want to improve on company culture or social graces.

Once the goals are defined, it is time to take action. This may seem to be a complex and challenging task in the beginning. To tackle it, one talk suggested introducing agile with agile methods themselves by building a cross-functional transition team over all departments and hierarchies. Using a transition backlog with small and verifiable tasks, the team can improve the agile strategy in iterative cycles. Public reviews and asking for feedback make the work transparent to all employees.

The talk also included thoughts on how to set up new agile development teams. A good idea is to start with a small core of experienced developers first. After that, more developers can be added step by step, for example one per month. Thus, the core team has some time to develop the first rituals and workflows, and later new developers can bring their own ideas and thoughts into the team.

# Living agile

An agile strategy is not only about frameworks, methods and terms. An organization does not get more open just because it uses agile concepts, and people do not change just because they get a new role title.

In order to be successful, the agile strategy has to become part of the company culture. For the employees, it is easier to accept workflows which they are comfortable with. This can be achieved by creating rituals on which culture can grow. Such rituals could be:

* **Open-floor standups**, also of the management.
* **Public reviews**.
* **Breakfast / pizza review:** After finishing a large task or epic, have a review for the whole company or department, together with breakfast, pizza, etc.
* **Brown bag session:** Technical discussions while eating / drinking.
* **Public to-do list** for every employee.
* **Delegation poker and delegation matrix:** Which responsibilities and duties can be given to the teams?

An organization should not create processes just for the sake of it. Instead it should ask which processes are useful, and how they can become part of the company culture. But most importantly, every member of the organization should be involved in the agile strategy.

# Distributed teams

Teams across different locations require more organizational effort than teams where all members are in the same location. Especially in agile development, a good communication strategy and well-defined rituals are necessary to make the team successful.

In distributed teams the role and responsibility of each member has to be clearly defined. This is especially true for the product owner(s) and scrum master(s). It is not forbidden to have more than one product owner, each being responsible for a different aspect of the project. For example, there could be one product owner for a single application and one for the whole system. But it is essential that they communicate frequently in order to synchronise. The team can also have multiple scrum masters, each in one location, to maintain the agile process.

Regular and frequent meetings, such as daily standups, retrospectives, and backlog refinements, are more important than in single-location teams. Video chat tools can prove beneficial to see the other part of the team. But more important than video, is the audio quality of the meeting. To avoid lags or distortions a telephone line can be used for audio transmission, together with a video chat tool.

Technical decisions have to be made across the different locations and not only in one team. It is also a good idea to have a person from the other location in the office for two to three days a week, who acts as a proxy to the rest of the team.

# Find your own way

Maybe the most important lesson of the Agile Day was that an organization should not strictly stick to the books when it defines its agile strategy. Each company has to find its own way of implementing agile concepts. Different prerequisites can lead to different requirements and different solutions. What is good for one company does not have to prove beneficial for another. The road to an agile strategy is iterative and explorative, just as the concept itself. Do not hesitate to change workflows that prove to be obstructive, and always aim for improvement.